I don't know how it works.
[Music]
Finally. Hang on.
Put on some shoes.
Our parents never owned their own homes.
So, we jumped at the idea of of go
following that American dream and you
know, raising our kids in our own home.
The majority of people in the United
States build their wealth and their
financial future with the equity of
their home.
A consumer horror story that's becoming
all too real for thousands of
homeowners.
And these zombie mortgages are robbing
people of the equity.
[Music]
Mortgages that they thought were paid
off a long time ago are actually coming
back to haunt them, putting some at risk
of ending up on the street. We know it's
tens if not hundreds of thousands of
these loans are still out there on the
books. This is a hugely profitable
business.
We came to this story in part because we
got records on one particular private
equity firm.
We called them the foreclosure files.
[Music]
And we decided that we had a unique
chance to really get inside this
business and figure out how it operated.
We can see how much money people are
making. A lot of times they're able to
get 10, 20, even 30 or 40 times their
initial investment. The personal wealth
of the individuals in some of these
firms has ballooned.
We thought it was an American dream, but
it's become quite the American
nightmare.
Bloomberg Audio Studios, podcasts,
radio, news.
It's a nightmare scenario. A debt
collector comes calling saying an old
loan you thought you could stop paying
off has suddenly come due with interest.
At the risk of being in a super annoying
editor, like
we want to get this out so that we have
a runway
to to do more.
>> story.
>> Yeah. Owning a home is not as
necessarily solid as you as, you know,
we all kind of assume.
And that plays into the story as well
cuz that's how these zombie mortgages
ended up coming back, right?
I'm Noah Buhayar. I'm an investigative
data journalist with Bloomberg News and
I've been working for the past couple of
months on a story about zombie
mortgages.
So, a zombie mortgage is a loan that was
taken out before 2008 typically that
homeowners used to buy their home or pay
for home repairs and then often a decade
or so later after not hearing about that
loan for years, a debt collection firm
buys it and asks the homeowner to pay
back
not just the money they took out 10, 15
years earlier, but all the back
interest.
A key thing in a lot of these cases is
if a borrower wasn't getting statements
for many years, they may not owe back
interest for that time period.
[Music]
We got kind of a unique perspective into
a company that purchases zombie
mortgages, ARC PE.
After reviewing almost a million
documents that we got from Distributed
Denial Secrets, they're a journalistic
nonprofit that receives and archives
hacked and leaked materials in the
public interest.
[Music]
We spent months cross-checking the files
with public ownership, transaction loan
and court records, all with the help of
a forensic accountant attorneys who've
worked on dozens of zombie cases.
It's been portrayed as sort of a passive
business of just a typical real estate
investment, but we can see how active
these sort of debt collectors and debt
buyers are and who they're targeting and
why.
We're working off of this trove um Yeah.
>> exclusive stuff that
uh just will feel really fresh.
>> One of the I think the most important
things for us right now is what is
crucial
to the core of what we're trying to do
and what is gravy. If we start drafting,
I think it's obvious like what we're
missing, right? In terms of anecdotes is
we don't have someone who has like lost
lost their home.
Oh.
Wait, Milo. Mimi.
Just 30 seconds, 30 seconds. Shh.
Toledo is a very small community, very
tight-knit. A lot of us look out for
each other.
All right, guys. Come on, let's go.
I'm really hungry. Well, that's why I
did the breakfast is ready.
We ended up having a child and we
realized that, you know, maybe it's time
to get into a house so she could have a
backyard to run in.
We weren't quite
there as financially to to
buy a house, but for some reason we got
approved and the 80/20 loan was what was
proposed to us to make it look like we
could afford the home.
So, at the heart of this phenomena is
the 80/20 loan where borrowers would
take out two loans. The first would
cover about 80% of of the mortgage or
down payment. The 20% would cover the
remainder of the cost for buying these
homes.
Some academic work has basically said
that a quarter of all mortgages
originated in the US in 2006 had one of
these, they call them piggyback
arrangements where people basically took
out two home loans when they bought a
property. And it's those second loans
that are really coming back now to to
haunt people.
They'll plunge to a record low
yesterday. The housing crisis has spread
nationwide.
During the 2008 financial crisis, it was
just sort of chaos. There were people
filing for bankruptcy. Home prices fell
in all 20 cities of the housing index.
Home prices have dropped to a point
where the homeowner owes more on both
loans than the house is actually worth.
For the financial security of every
American
Congress must act.
Some of these firms that lent this
money, they went out of business. You
had consolidation in the banking
industry and the net effect of that is
that a lot of these old smaller loans
just fell through the cracks. In 2012,
we created a new bottom. How much more
down are house prices going to go?
It actually took until about 2012 for
home prices to bottom out nationally.
And then it took another four years or
so until 2016 for them to reach the
levels that they were at during their
pre-crisis peak.
The people who have bought these second
loans for pennies on the dollar can see
that
there is now money to be made in these
homes because they've increased in value
so much.
Around 2020 during COVID when home
prices really shot up, we see this
phenomena spread across the country and
now it's not just in large urban core
centers where housing prices have shot
up. It's every community in the country
that these loans are now worth going
after.
[Music]
I missed you guys.
We got some sun.
We got some sun playing out in the lake
this this weekend.
Vien Valais is an interesting person who
we met through the course of our
reporting.
And I think her case actually really
illustrates that asymmetry of knowledge.
So, in 2018
ARC bought her loan and soon thereafter
she got a demand for repayment.
The following year, a foreclosure action
was filed against her in the local
county court
in Toledo.
By the time this process has started to
play out it's early 2020.
The whole world has been
plunged into the COVID-19 pandemic.
And she's presented with a choice. Do I
accept this loan modification that's
going to lock me in to all of this back
interest and fees or do I lose the roof
over my head?
It was surprising to me because we were
current on the first loan
but
I I don't know if it was a scare tactic
to try and get locked into some
modification. The amount had already
doubled, so it was suspicious to me. I
just kind of got really nervous about
not paying and not having a home.
One of the things that's so interesting
about this trove of documents that we
were able to review is we could really
understand how one of these businesses
organizes itself. So, this starts from
the process of acquiring these loans
often from banks and other financial
firms to doing the underwriting and due
diligence to actually figure out which
ones were going to be the best to
collect on to actually having a team of
asset managers who were trying to figure
out how best they were going to be able
to collect on these debts.
It is so explicit that we could see in
the spreadsheets that there is, you
know, once these pools of loans or loans
become profitable, there's even a column
that says like in the money and it was a
a yes or no.
These are properties that appear in the
foreclosure files, right? Yeah.
>> But have not been assigned in the data
at this point to Arc, Right.
>> So it's
Jesus, those are all their loans?
They're all on their books somewhere.
Those are That's just four states. No
but That's the data set that we've been
using to door knock.
>> Yeah, yeah, yeah.
>> Cuz cuz then it like focuses you we've
got this huge pool of 10,000 loans.
We've knocked on doors where we know
it's been assigned to Arc, but the
borrower has no idea.
And you ask him like have you heard of
this company and they're like I have no
idea.
But
>> But then in two weeks they might hear,
right?
So we've knocked on between Noah and I
and probably like hundreds of doors.
You know, you drive around these
communities and you can see how
widespread it is.
This is the financialization of housing.
It's really just a number on a
spreadsheet.
And if you've been paying your first
mortgage
and they can see what your home's worth,
that's a prime candidate for them to
sort of swoop in and start foreclosure
proceedings.
In most cases they want to get people on
a payment plan because they're paying
pennies on the dollar on the debt and
then if they can get you on a payment
plan that often includes a down payment,
they get money immediately and then and
they're getting monthly payments and
then once it's sort of viewed as like
good debt, they can sell that again to
somebody else.
Also, once they get people on a payment
plan, the legal rights of the homeowner
really start to wash away because like
you agree that you owe this money
and so you're now on a plan for debt
that you probably didn't know.
You don't want to think that you're
going to be out on the streets with your
kids.
Our dream was to have a house and we
wanted to maintain the house for our for
our children.
So we kind of
just signed it away and agreed to the
modifications. When you're desperate,
that's when, you know,
people try to take advantage of you
financially.
Why should someone lose their home and
all their equity because some Wall
Street bro wants to make more money off
somebody? Like, you know, making a
profit of a 10% return on the investment
is just not enough. They need a 1,000%
returns on their investment.
Hi Miss Holly, how are you? It's
Christie Kelly.
Most people aren't going to reach out to
a lawyer because if they have money
to pay a lawyer, they want to pay their
mortgage company because they don't want
to lose their home.
None of my clients have ever said, I
don't owe anything.
I don't think I should have a mortgage.
They all just said, I don't think I owe
that much money.
And you know what? They're right because
I've actually litigated these cases.
I've seen the documents and part of the
problem is
consumers dispute that they even owe the
debt at all because they received a
1099-C and they thought the debt was
canceled. And so why are they now being
told they owe not just what they
borrowed, but sometimes two or three
times the amount they borrowed.
[Music]
We ended 2005, 2006 we were able to
finally purchase a home.
It was in a perfect location. It was
like
>> two minutes from my parents' house from
where I grew up. So that was super nice.
It just was like the perfect little find
for us.
Well,
as the economy tanked for me business
goes down. I'm in the in the automotive
industry, so, you know, people hurt.
They're trying to ride
their cars out longer and not do the the
same amount of repairs. The paycheck's
not as
as solid.
>> As solid.
Well, we ultimately looked into what our
options were. Yeah, after we filed
bankruptcy, we received the uh 1099, the
cancellation of debt. We filed it with
our taxes and we never heard anything
further.
The Amables have
a really interesting case because their
second loan, which they had taken out in
for $98,000, they have an IRS document
that says the debt was canceled and
for normal people, I think most of us
would see a document that says
cancellation of debt and be like, I
don't owe this anymore.
And you said your first name is Noah?
Yes.
With every borrower story that we look
at, it's not just the stuff we found in
this cache of documents,
but there's lots often times of public
records behind that and you want to go
look at all of those.
And you want to look at old bankruptcy
filings. You want to look at
really anything you can to make sure the
stories add up.
Ticket number V244,
please proceed to station eight.
>> I hope these aren't sequential.
Hello. Hi, how are you? I'm good. Okay,
so this is everything. Great. All right,
you received
Amazing. Thank you so much.
You too. Please proceed to station six.
These are just some docs so I can help
fill in the timeline of what happened to
the Amables going all the way back to
when they bought
their house in 2005.
And the key one here is from 2017. It it
it shows when Arc
purchased the loan and recorded that uh
with the county and this is this is the
loan that that that's at the center of
of of the dispute.
I wanted to know what was the situation
with their first mortgage. Were there
other things on title that were going to
complicate or change the narrative of
their story that I wanted more
clarification on.
Yeah. Yeah.
Thank you so much.
Sounds good. Thanks. Bye.
J- Hey Jason, how are you?
Yeah, I'm here. Can you hear me?
Good. Sorry, I was just on with the um
that attorney. We have to be confident
that they're credible, right? And I
don't want to write about a case if if
there are doubts about that. So we
talked through different components of
their case and he said it's a real it's
a real crap shoot. He's like you've got
to you've got to get like proof positive
that like something in the servicing
notes that says it was generated but not
sent. This is not something we want to
fight. It is generally not allowed to
charge interest
on a loan if you're not sending
borrowers regular statements.
But actually proving that turns out to
be a big hurdle for a lot of folks.
There's a question of how do you prove
in court that you weren't getting
statements? So you end up in these
situations where it's the borrower's
word against the creditors and if you
can imagine
just how most of us keep our records,
you're asking people to come up with
documents from 15 years ago.
What we want to try to do here is to
figure out if these statements weren't
being sent. So the idea here is to see
if we can find a pattern inside the
documents.
These are the file names
and they're all the same. They don't
have the other dates and it's missing
the other documentation, the
representation of a printed document.
So now the idea is to take this pattern
that we found and see if we can apply it
to all 200 loan files.
>> Right.
What we're trying to track down, right,
is whether
the statement that was sent to the
borrower was actually legitimate at the
time, right? Like we don't have evidence
necessarily that
they were were not sent. That's one of
the problems we're dealing with because
it's like it could be created at any
moment.
>> Yeah. We don't have mailing records.
So in December 2020, the Amables get a
notice of default, which is the first
step in California usually in a
foreclosure. And that notice of default
said that they owed around $200,000.
Arc had acquired the loan for a little
over $2,000. So if they're successfully
foreclosing on the Amables for $200,000,
the return on that investment would
exceed 3,000%.
All the votes are coming out, so
>> I left messages
several days in a row hoping somebody
would get back to me.
I was trying to reach out to Arc and she
took the the message and and said, you
know, somebody would contact me.
Well, nobody really contacted me, but I
did ultimately receive a letter from
them with some documentation
which I still didn't quite understand
because I still felt like
the debt is gone.
I don't under- I don't
>> It's been canceled. How can they
>> canceled. I don't understand.
>> pursue this the way they're doing it.
In the same spirit that we want to turn
over every page, we want to read
everything we possibly can.
We certainly want to understand Arc's
perspective on all of this.
I'm just curious how like you and and
Arc and your staff think about the
morals and ethics of this business.
We
buy debt for a living, right? So, I
mean, is that immoral? No, not in any
way, shape or form. By the way, every
bank would be out of business if we
didn't do what we did. We try to work
with the borrowers as much as we can.
We're not, you know, kind of paid out
take your home away kind of lenders.
Um a majority of our loans we've done
we've done modifications on. A home from
both the borrower's point of view and
the investor's point of view as a lender
is an investment to make a return on
their money, not take a loss, right? So,
you knew what you signed up for is my
point. What about the statements, the
collectibility of back interest?
You don't have to be sending regular
statements, but you have to show that
there is litigation, but but you don't
have to send regular statements. So,
your position is that that's not a
requirement. Honestly, you really need
to speak to your servicers about that,
not me.
Um but servicers kind of
handle that, not me.
David Gordon, one of the managing
partners of Arc, uh
got on the phone with us and he raised
to us that
uh
Arc, like many of the debt uh buyers out
there, relied on servicers to actually
interface with borrowers. And it was
really their responsibility to make sure
they were following federal and state
laws.
But we found evidence in the internal
documents of them going around their
servicers to directly contact borrowers.
We know that they were often setting the
price of what they wanted for these
loans. So, the the idea that they were
completely separated doesn't hold up
with the internal documents.
What we actually have here are some
behind-the-scenes
documents that show us how the Amobleys
were pleading with Arc and their
representatives. It's a contemporaneous
account of the information that was
filtering back to this investment firm.
Arc had hired a servicing firm to try
and collect on this debt. The servicing
firm, their own employees were like,
they have these 1099-Cs canceling the
debt.
So, even people in the industry were
confused about the nature of this.
And then on top of that, the documents,
I think make a pretty compelling case
that they didn't get statements
for years.
Okay, we're good to go.
Do we have any updates on getting
inside Arc and
any other
companies that work with Arc or talking
to folks?
I've gotten a hold of
four former employees. They knew very
much that a lot of these loan files were
just incomplete, inconclusive.
They didn't pump the brakes necessarily
and say, well, because we don't have
definitive proof that these people were
getting statements regularly, we're not
going to charge for this whole period.
That wasn't the move. The move was
calculate what we think they owe, see if
we can get away with it. They'd contact
the borrower and the borrower would say,
what are you talking about? This debt
was canceled.
And I I asked this person, well, what
did you say that you guys do in that
situation?
And did did you did you back down? And
he was like, no, no, no, Arc never
backed down.
Come on,
criminals.
Well, ultimately, without working with
us or giving us a chance in any way,
they auctioned the second mortgage. A
gentleman ended up purchasing it and
showing up on our
doorstep on a Saturday to tell us that
he had purchased our home and that we
needed to vacate.
So, that's when we ended up here.
I'm just not looking back, trying to
just look project forward.
It's not something we've talked about in
a while.
At some point we just kind of
we fought and we fought and we fought.
And then we just kind of threw up our
hands.
What do you do when you can't afford to
fight it?
Yeah.
It's kind of like what they bank on,
isn't it?
It's what it feels like.
People are just struggling to make their
dreams come true.
The CFPB has returned over 21 billion
dollars to more than 205
million Americans who were cheated by
big banks and giant corporations. That
is why
>> So, the CFPB is the Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau. It was established in
2010 in response to the lending
practices that
precipitated the 2008 financial crisis.
When this financial cop can't do its
job, there is no one else in the federal
government to pick up the slack.
We know in talking people at the CFPB
that this was an active issue for them
and that there would be enforcement
actions
if it weren't for the fact that the
bureau's basically been silenced so far
under the Trump administration.
The private equity firm we're interested
in
was not on their radar.
There's this incredible irony with the
CFPB. They were created out of the
financial crisis specifically
to deal with this type of issue. Like,
you know, they've taken on payday
lenders and other things, but it's
really the financial crisis and housing
and banks. Right at this moment as we're
working on this story,
we don't know what's going to happen,
but it seems at best the bureau is going
to be a shell of what it was.
[Music]
I just feel like there's a real risk of
a boomerang here. But this is a primary
business for some of these mortgage
servicing companies. So, you can see you
you could imagine that now that the CFPB
has retreated, it's basically been
gutted,
servicers saying, we'll take that
business again. Yeah, it's incredibly
profitable for them.
>> the fact that these zombie cases and
these foreclosures are still going on
means that
somebody out there
is still willing to pursue
these claims.
And this gets back to the whole idea of
information asymmetry. Like, a lot of
borrowers don't
know the law in this area.
In Virginia, our legislature really was
one of the first in the country to
recognize this problem.
Last bill of the year.
This one's got a little bit of heat on
it.
All this requires is that if you're
going to foreclose on somebody's
mortgage and take their house, you've
got to provide some evidence you've
actually been trying to collect on the
debt and that you've been sending them
bills they haven't been paying them and
they've been interested in these.
And so, what that bill did was it
required creditors to sign under penalty
of perjury that every month they're
assessing interest, a monthly statement
or communication was sent to these
consumers.
Christie Kelly, you may unmute. This
does not affect reputable companies and
banks. It's essentially preventing debt
buyers who can foreclose without any
oversight or any court intervention.
Debt buyers have far more restrictions
in Virginia now to sue on a credit card
debt than they do to foreclose on
someone's home.
[Music]
You want to go first?
They were
pretty well
practiced attorneys who didn't
understand exactly how the process
worked. We took a lot to explain it to
them.
Is the practice that's sort of
outrageous? So, I think they were a
little incredulous about it, right?
These businesses, it's just like maybe
one foreclosure pays for itself for all
of the things they're doing. But for
that one family, that one foreclosure,
they might have lost everything.
Yeah, what I Yeah, what I didn't
understand is why the why the the banks
that don't engage in the process still
oppose the bill. The only
thought I had about that is that they
wanted to continue to try to monetize
their bad debt
in a more lucrative way. And we did hear
some things that said basically that the
market for these is going to evaporate.
Once this bill was passed,
there were no second mortgage
foreclosures for like a year cuz no one
knew how to follow this law. Which it
only says you just follow the follow
federal law. Just follow the law.
It is a complete whack-a-mole problem to
try to do it on a state-by-state basis.
Lots of borrowers have been facing this,
are going to continue facing this. So,
are we going to end up with a situation
where someone in Wisconsin gets justice,
but someone in Mississippi doesn't?
That's a a big question mark here.
For most people, the equity in their
home is how they save or transfer their
wealth to their next generation or it's
the nest egg that someone has that
they're counting on for retirement. And
to lose every cent of that, it's so
contrary to
the American dream.
[Music]
How long do you think before it'll be
ready?
Like give me like
>> A month?
That's what I'm saying. Like give me
give me the month of August to like
package things up and move it to
Cleveland.
[Applause]
So, with trying to maintain our income
and
you know, I was working three jobs at
the time,
trying to
you know, make sure the kids are taken
care of, you know,
it be it became a little bit too much.
There was just
so much that was not the same anymore.
Um my ex and I ended up separating.
Sorry.
But
you know, at this at this time,
the foreclosure is actually um
kind of a
a relief because it's allowing me to
move on.
[Music]
When you look at the individual
borrowers, it's a stark contrast to see
how much of this is a transfer of wealth
from middle and lower income Americans
to a group of debt buyers or investors.
You're seeing people lose their homes or
being put on payment plans that are
putting them into bankruptcy.
Meanwhile, we see the debt buyers'
wealth increase dramatically during this
time period.
What our reporting really shows is that
the tangible harm is happening. And this
is an area where there's effectively no
cop on the beat right now. And the
question is anyone going to pick up that
work or are these homeowners just going
to be left, you know, to defend
themselves?
[Music]